Your pancreas is a long slender organ
that lies behind the stomach
and intestines, near the spine.
This delicate but vital gland
is responsible for regulating your bodies
blood sugar with hormones such as insulin
and for helping breakdown
food with digestive enzymes.
The pancreas is divided into four parts:
the head,
the neck,
the body,
and the tail.
When cancer develops in the head of the pancreas,
surgeons often utilize the whipple procedure,
also known as a pancreatoduodenectomy,
to remove the cancerous and precancerous
tissue from the pancreas.
Before beginning a whipple procedure,
a patient is put under general anesthesia.
Your surgeon will then make
one or more incisions in the abdomen
depending upon the prefered approach,
subcostal,
midline,
or through several small incisions
known as a laparoscopic or
robot assisted approach.
Your surgeon will remove the head of the pancreas
and a small segment of the intestine,
along with the gall bladder and common bile duct.
A classic version of the whipple procedure
includes the removal of the lower end of the stomach
known as the pylorus.
The pylorus is a valve that controls
the flow of food from the stomach to the intestines.
This structure may be preserved when possible,
in a modification of the procedure known as
a pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy.
Especially large tumors may encroach
upon nearby critical blood vessels
that supply or drain the intestines.
Reconstruction of the veins and arteries
involved is technically challenging,
and is evaluated and performed
on a case by case basis.
Once the mass has been removed,
your surgeon will begin reconstructing the digestive tract.
A loop of small intestine will be connected
directly to the pancreas,
the common hepatic duct,
and then the stomach.
The whipple procedure is very effective
at eliminating cancer and abnormal tissue growth
within the head of the pancreas.
It is a major operation
that usually takes up to 6 and often up to 8 hours.
Most patients are fully recovered and
back to daily life within a couple of weeks.